---
layout: post
title: Week 6 and 7 of Gsoc with Sympy.
---
Self-Initializing Quadratic Sieve Continued

In these weeks most of my time spent was on Linear Algebra Stage of QS. I implemented fast gaussian elimination over modulo 2. Then i implemented `find proper factor` function. This
function try  to write the dependent rows of the reduced gaussian form of smooth relations matrix into the combination of the dependent rows. This way we can make the combination
a perfect square and we will obtain our desired relations of the form `X^2 = Y^2 moduloN`. And finally we can a proper factor by taking gcd(X - Y, N).

In these two weeks i worked on making the quadratic sieve more efficient. I made several optimizations like:
(i) Include -1 into factor_base as it increase the probability of finding smooth relation
(ii) Partial relations

**PARTIAL RELATIONS**

Out of these the most important optimization was to include the partial relations. This increase the speed to 2X times. A while checking for smoothness if we encounter a number
having only one prime factor outside the factorbase then this will be called a partial relation and we will store it.

In QS we are trying to find relations of `u**2 = v modN` where v is a B smooth number and a square. Let the factorbase bound be 10000 and v can be `p1**2 * p2**8....` a
square where `pi` are primes. But while seiving if `v` is `p1*2 * p2**10.... * p5` here v is a `square * a large prime number > 10000` so here `v` can be written as `v1 * P`          where `v1` is a B smooth     number but `P` is a prime number > `B`. SO we will collect these and if we find a pair of 2 relations where they have a common Large prime. Like
`RELATION 1 : u_1 ^ 2  =  v_1 * P modN` and `RELATION 2 : u_2 ^ 2  =  v_2 * P modN` here they both have same Large Prime factor `P`. So, they   can be combined such that
`(u_1 * u_2) ^ 2 = (v_1 * v_2) * (P ^ 2) modN` now multiply `mod_inverse(P, N) ^ 2` both sides. Then it will become `(u_1 * u_2 * mod_inverse(P, N)) ^ 2 = (v_1 * v_2)  modN`
which can be rewritten as `u_3 ^ 2 = v_3  modN`  thus forming a smooth relation. Here `RELATION 1 & 2` are partial relation.
