---
layout: post
title: Week 1 of Gsoc with Sympy.
---

### Week 1:

Finally i started my project. For 1st phase my main focus will be Elliptic curve factorization algorithm. I implemented a Point class whichstores point on the elliptic curve in Montgomery form. The sub methods of this class were doubling, addition and montgomery ladder algorithm for scalar multiplication of points. These methods use fast montgomery arthematic by ignoring the y coordinate and perform the calculations by using x and z coordinate only. 
<br><br>
The `Point` class : This class represents Montgomery form of points in an elliptic curve. The 
methods in this class includes addition, doubling and scalar multiplication of Points. For computing these methods we only need the x and z coordinate of the point thus decreasing the total number of operations and make the ECM faster. The addition of points requires 6 multiplications provided we already know the difference of the points. The doubling method requires 5 multiplications in total.
For scalar multiplication i used the Montgomery Ladder Algorithm and each step of this algorithm requires 11 multiplications. This algorithm is contructed in such a way that the difference between the intermediate points P and Q, `P - Q` is always constant and equals to the value of the initil point P0.
<br><br>
Next i implemented `ecm_one_factor`. This function returns one factor of a number using Lenstra's 2 Stage Elliptic curve Factorization with Suyama's Parameterization. Here Montgomery arithmetic is used for fast computation of addition and doubling of points in elliptic curve. 
<br><br>
Given a composite number with `gcd(n, 6) = 1`, this ECM algorithm attempts to find a non-trivial factor of `n`. This algorithm is inversion less. For generating a random elliptic curve i used Suyuma's parameterization. This ensures that te order of the curve is divisible by `12` and moreover either on `E` or a twist `E'` there exist a point whose x-coordinate is `u^3v^-3`. The curve 
`E : y**2 = x**3 + C(σ)*x**2 + x` where `C` depends on field parameter `σ != 0, 1, 5` according to
`u = σ**2 - 5`, `v = 4σ` and `C(σ) = (v - u)**3 (3u + v) / 4*u**3*v - 2`.
This ECM method considers elliptic curves in Montgomery form `(E : b*y**2*z = x**3 + a*x**2*z + x*z**2)` and involves elliptic curve operations `(mod N)`, where the elements in `Z` are reduced `(mod N)`. Since `N` is not a prime, `E` over `FF(N)` is not really an elliptic curve but we can still do point additions and doubling as if `FF(N)` was a field.
<br><br>
Stage 1 : The basic algorithm involves taking a random point `(P)` on an elliptic curve in `FF(N)`. The compute `k*P` using Montgomery ladder algorithm. Let `q` be an unknown factor of `N`. Then the order of the curve `E`, `|E(FF(q))|`, might be a smooth number that divides `k`. Then we have `k = l * |E(FF(q))|` for some `l`. For any point belonging to the curve `E`, `|E(FF(q))|*P = O`, hence 
`k*P = l*|E(FF(q))|*P`. Thus `kP.z_cord = 0 (mod q)`, and the unknownn factor of `N(q)` can be recovered by taking `gcd(kP.z_cord, N)`.
<br><br>
Stage 2 : This is a continuation of Stage 1 if `k*P != O`. The idea utilize the fact that even if 
`kP != 0`, the value of `k` might miss just one large prime divisor of `|E(FF(q))|`. In this case we only need to compute the scalar multiplication by `p` to get `p*k*P = O`. Here a second bound `B2` restrict the size of possible values of `p`.
<br><br>
Next i implemented a main funtion `ecm`. Here we first to find small factors using trial division.
After we exceed a certain bound then we factor the remainder by repeatedly calling `ecm_one_factor` until we completely factorizes the number. If the bound of `ecm_one_factor` fails to factor the number then there is a parameter `increase_bound` through which we can increase this bound.
<br><br>
This ECM algorithm is working fine for now and the results were amazing. It provide a huge performance boost to Sympy for factorization of large numbers. Next step is to improve the documentation to make it more readable for users and i also plan to improve the test coverage of the code.
For example: To factor `7060005655815754299976961394452809` ECM requires `~10sec` while Sympy is not able to factor it even in `~10mins`.
